<html>
<head><title> orderly </title></head>
<body>

h1. orderly -- v2 -- 2009.10.XX

h2. abstract

Orderly is an ergonomic micro-language that can represent a subset of "JSONSchema":http://json-schema.org.  Orderly is designed to _feel_ familiar to the average programmer and to be extremely easy to learn and remember.

h2. WARNING

This proposal is HIGHLY subject to change, it may evolve in drastic and jarring ways.  This is not real.  Do not believe it

h2. a subset of JSONSchema

JSONSchema is good in many ways, but not perfect.  JSONSchema attempts to provide a representation for three distinct types of information about JSON structures:
* Data structure (for documentation and validation purposes)
* Storage attributes (to provide hints for tools that wish to persist JSON data) 
* Metadata for Interaction Control (to provide hints on how to render a UI where data can be manipulated).

Orderly ignores all features of JSONSchema which aren't useful for validation, including the following attributes:
 
* options (label/value)
* title
* description
* transient
* hidden
* disallow
* extends
* identity

h2. a non-normative tutorial

A collection of Non-normative examples of Orderly:

h3. comments and whitespace

Orderly supports comments, comments are initiated with either '#' or '//' and continue to the first encountered newline ('\n').

Orderly doesn't rely overmuch on whitespace, leaving the decision of how to format your schema up to you.   

h3. property names

Property names may be anything that is allowed inside "JSON strings":http://json.org/.  Unlike JSON itself, however, orderly provides a shorthand where a subset of strings may be represented without quotes.  For instance these are all valid orderly:

bc.     string foo;
    string "foo";
    string "this is a property name with spaces"; 

h3. common properties

From the JSONSchema specification, four options exist which apply to all data types:

The @optional@ property indicates a value which is not required in a conformant JSON instance.  Optional values are represented in orderly with a trailing question mark:

bc.     string name?;
    string "name"?;


The @requires@ property indicates a that if a value is present in the instance JSON, another named value must also be present.  In orderly a requirement on another type is expressed by placing the property name (optionally quoted) enclosed in angle brackets at the end of a type definition:

bc.     string town <state>;

Multiple properties may required, and should be separated with commas:

bc.     string town <state,zip>;
    
The @enum@ propery specifies a set of allowable values for a key in the json document.

bc.     string mood [ "happy", "sad", "meh" ];
    integer secretOfLife [ 7, 42 ];

In a JSONSchema document the @default@ property specifies a default value for a property.  One could imagine that as an input object passes validation it will be automatically augmented with default values for required properties missing in the instance object.  The specification of default values in orderly looks something like assignment in most programming languages:

bc.     string mood [ "happy", "sad", "meh" ] = "happy"; # optimistically default to "happy"

h3. string types

Strings are specified in orderly using the @string@ type specifier.  Strings in JSONSchema support "minLength" and "maxLength" properties, which are represented in orderly using curly braces immediately after the type:  

bc.     string{4,12} login;

Omission of a specification of either minimum or maximum is allowed:

bc.     string{4,} login; # login requires at least 4 chars
    string{,32} name; # name may not be longer than 32 chars

Regular expressions are supported in JSONSchema for string values.  In orderly you may directly provide a regular expression using '/' syntax to denote the beginning and end of the regular expression:

bc.     string mood /^((happy)|(sad)|(meh))$/;

h3. number & integer types

Numbers are specified in orderly using the @number@ type specifier.  In JSONSchema numbers and integers support ranges, in orderly these ranges for numbers are specified in the same way we specify ranges for strings:

bc.     number{0.02, 0.98} numNum;
    integer{0,10} rating;

Syntactically, numbers in orderly follow the same rules as numbers in JSON.

h3. boolean types

Boolean types are represented in orderly using the @boolean@ type specifier:

bc.     boolean iShouldStay;

h3. object types

Objects are represented in orderly using the @object@ type specifier:

bc.     object {
        string foo;
        integer bar;
        number baz;
    } myobject;

h3. array types

Arrays are specified using the @array@ type specifier.  Schemas for arrays elements may be specified in one of two ways.  First we can specify a single schema that governs all array members, with the schema enclosed by square brackets:

bc.     array [
        numbers{0.00, 1.00};
    ] weights; # an array of floating point weights between 0 and 1.

Alternately, "tuple typing" may be used to specify the allowable values for an array, in this case a list of schemas that apply to each member of the array in sequence:

bc.     array {
        integer;
        string;
        number;
    } artificial;

Finally, when tuple typing is used, the @*@ operator may be used to allow additional elements at the end of an array.  For instance, to specify an array where
 the first element is an integer and the remaining are of arbitrary number and type, one might use the following schema:

bc.     array { integer; }* intFollowedByWhatever; 

Finally, array types also support range semantics, for min/max number of elements:

bc.     array { integer; } {0,10} myArrayOfSmallInts;

h3. handling "additional properties" in arrays and objects

JSONSchema provides the @additionalProperties@ attribute which allows a schema author to either:
# specify that a valid instance object/array may not have any properties not in the schema 
# specify an additional schema that applies to any additional properties in the instance object/array that are not explicitly mentioned in the schema

Orderly supports expressing wether or not additional properties should be allowed, but does not allow you to specify a schema which governs these additional properties.  A trailing @*@ in orderly indicates additional properties are allowed, and occurs immediately after the definition of nested schemas (the closing curly brace) for both objects:

bc.    object {
        string name;
        string title;
    }* employee;

and arrays

bc.    array { integer; string; }* myOpenTupleTypedArray;

h3. null types

The null type in JSONSchema specifies a value that must be null.  The @null@ type specifier is orderly's equivalent:

bc.     null likeAir;

As explained in the JSONSchema proposal, @null@ is useful "mainly for purpose of being able use union types to define nullability".  For example:

bc.     union {
        string [ "Sr.", "Jr.", "III" ];
        null; 
    } suffix;

h3. any types

"Any types" are represented in orderly using the @any@ type speicifier: 

bc.     any notes;

h3. unions

It is possible in JSONSchema to specify a property that may be of one of many different types.  In orderly this functionality is represented using the @union@ type specifier:

bc.     union {
        string;
        number;
    } myUnion;

A key syntactic feature to note is the supported (required?) ommission of property names where they would be meaningless.

h3. references

*TODO*.  We'll probably use the @reference@ type specifier and allow the consumer to override the value name.  for example:

bc.      object {
        string name;
        string title;
        ref "http://json-schema.org/card" secretary;
        array {
            ref "http://json-schema.org/card";
        } reports;
    } employee;

h3. more complex examples

A number with a range, enumerated possible values, and a default value:

bc.     integer{0,256} powerOfTwo[1,2,4,8,16,32,64,128,256] = 1;

An object with enumerated possible values and a default.

bc.     object {
      string beast;
      number normalTemperature;
    } temps [ { "beast": "canine", "normalTemperature": 101.2 },
        { "beast": "human", "normalTemperature": 98.6 } ]
      = { "beast": "canine", "normalTemperature": 101.2 };


h3. open design challenges

A number of design challenges remain before orderly is "complete":
* A decision is needed regarding support of the JSONSchema notion of making type values that are not explicitly mentioned analogous with 'any'.
* @additionalProperties@ functionality must be figured out, as documented above
* @maxDecimal@ support
* Extending and Referencing (perhaps requiring the introduction of 'id' cruft?)

h3. gotchas

When you stare hard enough at the grammar of a non-trival language you usually learn quite a deal.  Sometimes what you learn can be surprising or downright confusing.  Here's a tour of the darker parts alleys of orderly:

Brackets and braces -- visually a tad confusing:

bc.     integer{7,42} secretOfLife[7,42];

and a little bit more confusing:

bc.     array { integer{7,42}[7,42]; } secretOfLife;

h2. grammar

bc.. ----------------------------------------

orderly_schema
    named_entry ';'
    named_entry

named_entries
    named_entry ';' named_entries
    named_entry 
    # nothing

unnamed_entries
    unnamed_entry ';' unnamed_entries
    unnamed_entry 
    # nothing

named_entry
    definition_prefix property_name definition_suffix
    string_prefix property_name string_suffix

unnamed_entry
    definition_prefix definition_suffix
    string_prefix string_suffix

definition_prefix
    'integer' optional_range
    'number' optional_range
    'boolean'
    'null'
    'any'
    # a tuple-typed array 
    'array'  '{' unnamed_entries '}' optional_additional_marker optional_range 
    # a simple-typed array (notice the '*' marker is disallowed)
    'array'  '[' unnamed_entry ']' optional_range   
    'object' '{' named_entries '}' optional_additional_marker   
    'union'  '{' unnamed_entries '}'

string_prefix
    'string' optional_range

string_suffix
    optional_perl_regex definition_suffix

definition_suffix
    optional_enum_values optional_default_value optional_requires optional_optional_marker optional_additional_marker 
    # nothing

csv_property_names
    property_name "," csv_property_names
    property_name
     
optional_requires
    '<' csv_property_name '>'
    # nothing

optional_optional_marker
    '?'
    # nothing  

optional_additional_marker
    '*'
    # nothing  

optional_enum_values
    json_array
    # nothing  

optional_default_value
    '=' json_value
    # nothing  

optional_range
    '{' json_number ',' json_number '}'
    '{' json_number ',' '}'
    '{' ',' json_number '}'
    '{' ',' '}'                          # meaningless, yes.
    # nothing
    
property_name
    json_string
    [A-Za-z_\-]+ (alphanumeric & underbar & dash)

optional_perl_regex # perl compatible regular expressions are supported
    '/' ([^/]|\/) '/' # a Perl 5 compatible regular expression
    #nothing
 
----------------------------------------
---------- [The JSON Grammar] ----------
----------------------------------------

json_object
    {}
    { members } 
members
    pair
    pair , members
pair
    json_string : json_value
json_array
    []
    [ elements ]
elements
    json_value
    json_value , elements
json_value
    json_string
    json_number
    json_object
    json_array
    'true'
    'false'
    'null'

----------------------------------------

json_string
    ""
    " chars "
chars
    char
    char chars
char
    any-Unicode-character-
        except-"-or-\-or-
        control-character
    \"
    \\
    \/
    \b
    \f
    \n
    \r
    \t
    \u four-hex-digits 
json_number
    int
    int frac
    int exp
    int frac exp 
int
    digit
    digit1-9 digits
    - digit
    - digit1-9 digits 
frac
    . digits
exp
    e digits
digits
    digit
    digit digits
e
    e
    e+
    e-
    E
    E+
    E-

p.

h2. Contributing

This specification, orderly-json.org, and the orderly reference implementation are all <a href="http://github.com/lloyd/orderly">hosted on github</a>, you may fork all you like.

h2. Contributors

Many people have offered feedback and ideas which shaped this project.  Those people include (in alphabetical order):

* Alexandre Morgaut  	 	
* David Grigsby
* Hatem Nassrat 
* Steve Spencer
* Tatu Saloranta
* Toby Inkster

h2. History

* (2009.10.02) "v-1" -- The idea for orderly was "first uttered":http://trickyco.de/2009/10/02/orderly-jsonschema
* (2009.10.05) "v0" -- "orderly-json.org":http://orderly-json.org was erected and a more fully baked proposal put together thanks to feedback.
* (2009.10.07) "v1" -- editorial review, small additions 

h2. License

All the cruft you find here is covered under a BSD style license, even if it's not approprately marked.  The act of forking this project on github is implicit permission to pull back your contributions and redistribute them under this same license.

<pre>
 Copyright 2009, Lloyd Hilaiel.
 
 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
 met:
 
  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
 
  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
     the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
     distribution.
 
  3. Neither the name of Lloyd Hilaiel nor the names of its
     contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
     from this software without specific prior written permission.
 
 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
 IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
 WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
 DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
 INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
 (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
 SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
 HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
 STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
 IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
 POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
</pre>

<script type="text/javascript">
var gaJsHost = (("https:" == document.location.protocol) ? "https://ssl." : "http://www.");
document.write(unescape("%3Cscript src='" + gaJsHost + "google-analytics.com/ga.js' type='text/javascript'%3E%3C/script%3E"));
</script>
<script type="text/javascript">
try {
var pageTracker = _gat._getTracker("UA-10971932-1");
pageTracker._trackPageview();
} catch(err) {}</script>

</body>
</html>
